---
title: Intro for Chris
permalink: /para/chris/1.html
layout: para
map-on: true
---

### Travelers on the road


{% include feature/quote.md text="What do you dudes think about hiking out tonight?" source="Michael Decker" %}


I wake up early. The sky is clear above our campsite but a veil of rain is sweeping through the forested valley below, consuming distant peaks. The wind is shifting. After lighting a small fire to dry my socks and boots, I sit quietly beneath a small black tarp, drinking hot coffee with my bare feet near the flame, watching the weather in the distance. It’s almost silent here except for the slight breeze, the crackling wood, and the crinkling sound of the tarp as it inhales and exhales with the wind. And aside from the far-off rain and the few mountain blue birds I can spot darting between the bone-like standing dead trees, the landscape is seemingly vacant.

{% include feature/figure.html objectid="SalmoPriest-CriticalHabitat-SalmoDivide535rim-IMAG0056" style="border-radius:20% 40% 17% 5% !important;"  %}

Directly in front me lies a patchwork of mostly dead but some living trees. A shot from Google earth would depict a skeletal forest draping over the ridge flowing west in the direction of my vision, spliced every so often by a vein of old growth timber. Peppered here and there with the emerging green of an early seral habitat. The standing dead trees, stripped of foliage and limbs, are the reason I have such a clear view of the space laid out before me. If not for their nudity, I would be enclosed, screened, and protected from the wind by ancient, heavily clad trees with thick beards of lichen. But the recent wildfire has exposed this ridgeline and provided an expansive view of the Salmo-Priest Wilderness—a 41,335-acre swath of what appears to be untouched forest that straddles the invisible border between northeastern Washington and northwestern Idaho and contains part of the South Selkirk mountain range. 



{% include feature/map.html filter="item.location contains '535 Outcropping'" zoom="16" latitude="48.950421" longitude="-117.016485" basemap="Esri_WorldImagery" style="border-radius: 10% 20% 0% 50%;margin:0 -25% 0 -50%;"%}

We’re camped on the Idaho side of this line, at about 6000 feet and roughly two miles shy of the Canadian border, on the protruding cretaceous granite of the Idaho Batholith’s Kaniksu lobe—a sixty five million year old rock that rested, in its infancy, in the depths of the Pacific Ocean. My two friends (and for the purposes of this trip) colleagues, Jack Kredell and Michael Decker, are asleep in the tents about twenty yards behind me, in a small grove of sub-alpine fir and englemann spruce trees. They’ve been there since we retired last night after an exhausting ten-mile hike in. We arrived just before dark and had barely enough time to set up camp, light a fire, and cook a freeze-dried meal. At that point the weather was fair and the scene I’m observing right now was under mostly clear skies, punctuated at dusk by a gilded horizon. The wind picked up after sundown and we heard thunder and saw flickers of lightning in the distance. But as far as I know no storm passed over our site.


{% include feature/quote-medium.md text="The standing dead trees, stripped of foliage and limbs, are the reason I have such a clear view of the space laid out before me." align="center" %}

This is our second of what will be many trips into these mountains this summer. We’ve been drawn here primarily by the recent extirpation of the South Selkirk mountain caribou, an animal that was specific to the rocky alpine ridges and the old growth, lichen-heavy forests that a decade ago would’ve surrounded me. The caribou inhabited these mountains, residing mainly at the highest elevations—to avoid predators—except for early winter, when they collected beneath the dense canopy of the cedar-hemlock forests lower down. There, they would feed on lichen-bearing deadfall and remaining summer forbs until the snow piled high and dense enough for them to reach arboreal lichens in the alpine zone—where they would spend winters feeding in the pregnant silence of snow-draped spruce and sub-alpine fir. Unlike the barren ground caribou of Alaska and other arctic regions that migrate long distances and in large numbers, the mountain—or black caribou as some refer to them—have evolved to migrate vertically and in smaller herds. They are an ecotype of woodland caribou (Rangifer Tarandus), a subspecies of the North American caribou, that at one time inhabited most northern regions of the United States, including parts of Maine, New Hampshire, and Minnesota. While the majority of woodland caribou vanished from the lower-48 by the late nineteenth century, Idaho’s mountain caribou were able to outlast their relatives by, as Jack puts it, “migrating annually to the arctic; a migration not to colder latitudes of the Far North, but to colder altitudes in the Selkirks” (Kredell 5). That is, until January of 2019 when the last two were captured in a net and air lifted to a captive breeding program in BC.  


{% include feature/figure.html objectid="SalmoPriest-CriticalHabitat-SalmoDivide535rim-IMAG0029" style="border-radius:20% 40% 17% 5% !important;"  %}
